#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-
#+TITLE: Collective Insanity
#+STARTUP: showall
#+PROPERTY: filename
  :PROPERTIES:
  :Name: /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/prolog/collapse-insanity.org
  :Created: 2017-04-19T12:01@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID: 5026e6f7-fbdd-4935-a839-f1273be23f23
  :URL:
  :END:
#+INCLUDE: ./inc/head.org
#+INCLUDE: ./inc/macros.org

{{{breadcrumbs}}}

#+HTML: <div class="outline-2" id="meta">
| *Author*  | Brad Collins <brad@chenla.org>             |
| *Date*    | {{{time(%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S)}}}              |
#+HTML: </div>

#+TOC: headlines 4

* Introduction

Man has a proclivity to occasionally go collectively insane and do
monsterous things.

We are primarily interested in the damage caused by these bouts of
suicidal predilections and how it can be cauterized and then minimize
the damage and then help rebuild after people have come to their
senses.

The lesser damage we will call /loss/, and the greater damage, that
may or may not contribute to a /collapse/.  Local collapses can cascade
the cause chain reactions that result in systemic collapses that can
lead to major die-offs and prolonged dark ages.

Loss can be as small as a church or town book burning party, or as
large as the loss of enormous amounts of knowledge in events such as
the fires that destroyed the Library of Alexandria, that resulted in
the losso  of a significant portion of mankind's recorded knowledge
and memory.

It is hoped that by conducting this research, we can begin to
accumulate a number of tests, that recognize danger signs when they
occur before they get out of hand and become dangerous.  This is
certainly no final solution to the problem -- we are too stupid to
entirely fix this in ourselves.  It is the dark part of our nature
that we need to accept as a weakness but never give in to if there is
any way possible.  It is hoped that over the next 20-50,000 years we
will have made real progress in breeding this darkness out of us, or
at least made it more managable.  There is hope.  The world is far
more at peace and mankind is not as much a wild pack of murderous
bastards that we were even a few hundred years ago.  Who knows,
perhap's when the clock of the Long Now chimes it's ten thousandth
year deep in a mountain in a place that was once called Texas, mankind
will have found a way to at least coexist with our fellow humans
without all the blind hatred, ignorance, intolerance and violence that
has so marked our species history to date.


* Religious & Ideological Cleansing

  - Spanish Inquisition
  - Islamic State
  - McCarthy Hearings

* Brutal & Repressive States

  - Eastern Germany

* Genocide

  - Khmer Rouge
  - Great Leap Forward etc.
  - Rowanda
  - Stalinism
  - Nazi Regime
  
* Escapism

  - Counter Culture Movement
  - Christian Evangelical Movement


* Tactics

- cognitive dissonance
    - willfull belief in lies
    - alternate facts
    - sell the controversy
    - deny deny deny
    - mix facts with fiction

* Anti-Intellectualism

There has long been a large part of most societies that mistrust the
educated, even more than they distrust those who decieve them, steal
from them and are responsible for their misery.

I tend to think that a lot of this comes from the belief that runs
deep in many religions and cultures that knowledge is dangerous and
that those who strive after knowledge are tempting the anger of the
gods.

The most bald-faced of such myths is that of Adam, Eve and the
Serpent.  Man's greatest sin is to seek knowledge, because that
knowledge would make man a god in his own right.  And if you are in a
group that is uneducated, it is easy to think of the college boy is a
threat to you because he knows things you don't, he has an advantage
over you that you don't have.  It's an imbalance of power within a
group -- that can be used for good or ill.  It can inspire people
within the group to become educated.  Or it can be used to create an
imaginary enemy who wants to do you harm and looks down on you.

The rich, for the most part, are not seen that way.  It's said that
there are no poor people in America, but only rich people who haven't
gotten rich yet.  Popular figures like Donald Trump are icons for the
poor, because Trump is certainly as uneducated as any of them, so even
if he is screwing you, it's okay, because deep down he's just like
you, and it's not a stretch to believe that if the tables were turned
you'd be doing the same as Trump is doing now.

This is not a terribly flattering picture to paint about ourselves --
that possessing knowledge is inheriently believed to be a bad thing,
akin to Eve's act of partaking from the tree of knowledge and
banishing all of Man to eternal original sin.  All of us share that
sin, though it's not clear why.  In the story, God gave man free will,
but at the same time if your parent sins, you have sinned and all
those who come after as well.  You do not have the same free will as
Adam and Eve.

The Tower of Babel is another odd story -- that villifies peaceful
cooperation between people.  Because collectively they would have
knowledge and powers that could challenge God as well.

And yet, the only thing that has improved mankind's lot in life, gave
her more saftey, shelter, food, health and longer life for herself and
her children is knowledge.  Knowledge manifests itself as technology
-- innovations that solve problems that threaten us.  The more we eat
of the tree of knowledge the better things get for us.  But the old
beliefs still murmer and whisper fear in our ears, that we are doing
something wrong.

* Dark Ages

Collapse has often led to periods of stagnation, ignorance and
brutality sometimes lasting centuries.

* The Burning of Books and Burying of the Scholars (焚書坑儒)

 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burning_of_books_and_burying_of_scholars][Burning of books and burying of scholars]] | Wikipedia

#+CAPTION: Killing the Scholars and Burning the Books (18th C.)
[[./img/insanity/Killing_the_Scholars,_Burning_the_Books.jpg]]

#+begin_comment
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Killing_the_Scholars,_Burning_the_Books.jpg][File:Killing the Scholars, Burning the Books.jpg]] | Wikipedia

There are several other images in the img directory we can use.
#+end_comment


#+begin_quote
The supposed burning of texts in 213 BC and live burial of 460
Confucian scholars in 210 BC by the First Emperor of the Qin dynasty
of ancient China.
#+end_quote



* Year Zero Man

Mao, Pol Pot, Stalin etc.

They all have a grand vision for a Utopian Society, when it doesn't
work they realise that people don't change much after they reach a
certain age.  So instead of gradually working towards the Utopia step
by step over multiple generations they decide to take a short-cut and
outright murder everyone that isn't able to change and start with a
clean slate -- year zero. 
