#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-
#+TITLE: Holon
#+STARTUP: showall
#+PROPERTY: filename
  :PROPERTIES:
  :Name: /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/prolog/structure-holon.org
  :Created: 2017-04-21T12:00@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID: 849fe9bd-57dc-4f42-8a35-844d467bf71c
  :URL:
  :END:
#+INCLUDE: ./inc/head.org
#+INCLUDE: ./inc/macros.org

{{{breadcrumbs}}}

#+HTML: <div class="outline-2" id="meta">
| *Author*  | Brad Collins <brad@chenla.org>             |
| *Date*    | {{{time(%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S)}}}              |
#+HTML: </div>

#+TOC: headlines 4

* Introduction

* Holons

When we started we defined a simple model where everything
could be reduced to /assertions/ and /messages/.  We have
now replaced the assertion with the concept of the /fnord/.
In the same way, we need a more useful concept for a message
than a collection of assertions.

A holon is a philosophical concept that was coined by [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Koestler][Arthur
Koestler]], in his 1967 book [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ghost_in_the_Machine][The Ghost in the Machine]].

#+begin_quote
A holon is a system (or phenomenon) that is an evolving
self-organizing dissipative structure, composed of other
holons, whose structures exist at a balance point between
chaos and order. It is sometimes discussed in the context of
self-organizing holarchic open systems (or, SOHO systems). A
holon is maintained by the throughput of matter–energy and
information–entropy connected to other holons and is
simultaneously a whole in and itself at the same time being
nested within another holon and so is a part of something
much larger than itself. Holons range in size from the
smallest subatomic particles and strings, all the way up to
the multiverse, comprising many universes. Individual
humans, their societies and their cultures are intermediate
level holons, created by the interaction of forces working
upon us both top-down and bottom-up. On a non-physical
level, words, ideas, sounds, emotions—everything that can be
identified—is simultaneously part of something, and can be
viewed as having parts of its own, similar to sign in regard
of semiotics. In 2013 Australian academic JT Velikovsky
proposed the holon as the structure of the meme, the unit of
culture, synthesizing the major theories on memes of Richard
Dawkins, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, E. O. Wilson, Frederick
Turner and Arthur Koestler. Defined in this way, holons are
related to the concept of autopoiesis, especially as it was
developed in the application of Stafford Beer to
second-order cybernetics and the viable system model, but
also Niklas Luhmann in his social systems theory.

-- [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holon_(philosophy)][Holon (philosophy)]] | Wikipedia
#+end_quote

Essentially everything is a /holon/ -- which can be seen in
one context as a self-contained whole, and from another
perspective as a part of a larger whole.

The message then is a holon and the holon becomes our atomic
unit.  A message is made up of one or more assertions,
statements or facts.  An assertion is not a message, but
must be encoded in a message.  An assertion that is made,
stored or sent and then eventually recieved or read is a
message.  An assertion can be encoded in an infinite number
of messages.


#+begin_quote
There were once two Swiss watchmakers names Bios and Mekhos,
who made very fine and expensive watches.  There names may
sound a little strange, but their fathers had a smattering
of Greek and were fond of riddles.  Although their watches
were in equal demand, Bios propspered, while Mekhos just
struggled along; in the end he had to close his shop and
take a job as a mechanic with Bios.  The people in the town
argued for a long time over the reasons for this development
and each had a different theory to offer, until the true
explanation leaked out and proved to be both simple and
surprising.

The watches they made consisted of about one thousand parts
each, but the two rivals had used different methods to put
them together.  Mekhos had assembled his watches bit by bit
-- rather like making a mosaic floor out of small coloured
stones.  Thus each time when he was disturbed in his work
and had to put down a partly assembled watch, it fell to
pieces and he had to start again from scratch.

Bios, on the other hand, had designed a method of making
watches by constructing, for a start, sub-assemblies of
about ten components, each of which held together as a an
independent unit.  Ten of these sub-assemblies could then be
fitted together into a sub-system of a higher order; and ten
of these sub-systems constituted a whole watch.  This method
proved to have two immense advantages.

In the first place, each time there was an interruption or a
disturbance, and Bios had to put down, or even drop, the
watch he was working on, it did not decompose into its
elementary bits; instead of starting all over again, he
merely had to reassemble that particular sub-assembly on
which he was working at the time; so that at worst (if the
disturbance cam when he had nearly finished the sub-assembly
in hand) he had to repeat nine assumbling operations, and at
best none at all.  Now it is easy to show mathematically
that if a watch consists of a thousand bits, and if some
disturbance occurs on an average of once in every hundred
assembling operations -- then Mekhos will take four thousand
times longer to assemble a watch than Bios.  Instead of a
single day it will take him eleven years.  And of for
mechanical bits, we substitute amino scids, protien
molecules, organelles, and so on, the ration between the
time-scales becomes astronomical; some calculations indicate
that the whole lifetime of the earth would be insufficient
for producing even an amoeba -- unless he becomes converted
to Bios' mthod and proceeds hierarchically, from simple
sub-assemblies to more complex ones.

-- Ghost in the Machine pg 46-47.
#+end_quote


#+begin_quote
The first universal characteristic of hierarchies is the
relativity, and indeed ambiguity, of the terms 'part' and
whole' when applied to any of the sub-assemblies.  Again it
is the very obviousness of this feature which makes us
overlook its implications.  A 'part', as we generally use
the word, means something fragmentary and incomplete, which
by itself would have no legitimate existence.  On the other
hand, a 'whole' is considered as something complete in
itself which needs no further explanation.  But /'wholes'
and 'parts' in this absolute sensejust do not exist
anywhere/, either in the domain of living organisms or of
social organizations.  What we find are intermediary
structures on a series of levels in an ascending order of
complexity: sub-wholes which display, according to the way
you look at them, some of the characteristics commonly
attributed to parts.

-- Ghost in the Machine pg.48
#+end_quote


#+begin_quote
The members of a hierarchy, like the Roman god Janus, all
have two faces looking in opposite directions: the face
turned towards the subordinate levels is that of a
self-contained whole; the face turned upward towards
towards the apex, that of a dependent part.  One is the face
of the master, the other the face of the survant.  This
'/Janus effect/' is a fundemental characteristic of
sub-wholes in all types of hierarchies.

-- Ghost in the Machine pg 48.
#+end_quote

#+begin_quote
But there is no satisfactory word in our vocabulary to refer
to these Janus-faced entities: to talk of sub-wholes (or
sub-assemblies, sub-structures, sub-skills, sub-systems) us
awkward and tedious.  It seem preferable to coin a new term
to designate these nodes on the hierarchic tree which behave
partly as wholes or wholly as parts, according to the way
you look at them.  The term I would propose is 'holon', from
the Greek /holos/ = whole, with the suffix /on/ which, as in
prot/on/ or neutr/on/, suggests a particle or part.

-- Ghost in the Machine pg 48.
#+end_quote

#+begin_quote
...it is essential for the stability and efficient
functioning of the body social that each of its
sub-divisions should operate as an autonomous, self-reliant
unit which, though subject to control from above, must have
a degree of independence and take routine contingencies in
its stride, without asking higher authority for
instructions.  Otherwuse the communication channels would
become overloaded, the whole system clogged up, the higher
echelons would be kept occupied with petter detail and
unable to concentrate on more important factors.

-- Ghost in the Machine pg 55.
#+end_quote


#+begin_quote
No man is an island he is a holon. A Janus-faced entity who,
looking inward, sees himself as a self-contained unique
whole, looking outward as a dependent part. His
/self-assertive tendency/ is the dynamic manifestation of
his unique /wholeness./, his autonomy and independence as a
holon. Its equally universal antagonist, the /integrative
tendency/, expresses his dependence on the larger whole to
which he belongs: his '/part-ness/'.  The polarity of these
two tendencies, or potentials, is one of the /leitmotivs/ of
the present theory.  Empirically, it can be traced in all
phenomena of life; theoretically, it is derived from the
part-whole dichotomy inherent in the concept of the
multi-layered hierarchy.... For the time being let me repeat
that the /self-assertive tendency is the dynamic expression
of the holon's wholeness, the integrative tendancy, the
dynamic expression of it's partness."

-- Ghost in the Machine pg 56.
#+end_quote



#+begin_quote
the self-assertive tendency is the dynamic expression of the
holon's wholeness, the integrative tendency, the dynamic
expression of its partness.
#+end_quote


#+begin_quote
A Holon is a node in a Holarchy. A Holon looks up for what
it needs to cooperate with and integrate with. It looks
sideways for what it needs to compete with. It looks down
for what it wants to command. Each holon can not be fully
explained by or predicted by a study of its parts. It is
something more. A Holon is also part of something bigger
that it is being affected by. But at the same time it has a
high degree of autonomy, it has a life of its own.

-- [[http://www.worldtrans.org/essay/holarchies.html][Holarchies]], Flemming Funch, 4 Feb 95.
#+end_quote



** Holarchies




** Four Types of Holarchies

#+begin_quote
Well, if you look at the variuous "new paradign"
theorists--from holists to ecofeminists to deep ecologists
to systems thinkers--you find that all of them are offering
various types of holarchies, of hierarchies.  Eaven the
anti-hierarchy ecophilosophers offer their own hierarchy,
which is usually something like: atoms are parts of
molecules which are parts of cells, which are parts
individual organisms, which are parts of families, which are
parsts of cultures, which are parts of the total biosphere.
That is their defining hierarchy, their defining holarchy,
and except for some confusion about what "biosphere" means,
that is a fairly accurate holarchy.

And likewise, orthodox researchers offer their own
hierarchies.  We find hierarchies in moral development, in
ego development, in cognitive development, in self needs, in
defense mechanisms, and so on.  And these, too, see to be
largely accurate.  We also find developmental holarchies in
everything from Marxism to strucuralism to linguistics to
computer programming--it's simply endless.

In other words, whether it's realized or not, most of the
maps of the world that have been offered are in fact
holarchical, for the simple reason that holarchies are
impossible to avoid (because holons are impossible to
avoid).  We have literally hundreds and hundreds of these
holoarchical maps from around the world--East and West,
North and South, ancient and modern--many of these maps
included the mapmaker as well.

-- [[bib:wilbur:1996wilbur][A Brief History of Everything]] p72 | Ken Wilbur
#+end_quote


But then Wilbur goes further by comparing as many different
holarchies as he could to see if they all fit together.

#+begin_quote
So at one point I simply started making lists all of these
holarchical maps--conventional and new age, Eastern and
Western, premodern and postmodern--everything from systems
theory to the Great Chain of Being, from the Buddhist
vijnanas to Piaget, Marx, Kholberg, and the Vedantic koshas,
Loevinger, Maslow, Linski, Kabbalah, and so on.  I had
literally hundreds of thesethigs, these maps, spread out on
legal pads all over the floor.

At first I thought these maps were all referring to the same
territory, so to speak.  I thought they were all different
versions of an essentially similar holarchy.  There were
just too many similarities and overlaps in all of them.  So
by comparing and contrasting them all, I thought I might be
able to find the single abd basc holarchy that they were all
trying to represent in their own ways.

The more I tried this, the more it became obvious that it
wouldn't work.  These various holarchies had some undeniable
similarities, but they differed in certain profound ways,
and the exact nature of these differences was not obvious at
all.  And most confusing of all, in some of these
holorchical maps, the holons got /bigger/ as development
progressed, and in others, they became /smaller/ (I didn't
yet understand that evolution produces greater depth, less
span).  It was a real mess, and at several points I decided
to just chuck it, forget it, because nothing was coming of
this research.

But the more I looked at these various holarchies, the more
it dawned on me that there were actually /four very
different types/ of holarchies, four very different types of
holistic sequences.  As you say, I don't think this had been
spotted before--perhaps because it was so stupidly simple;
at any event it was news to me.  But once I put all of these
holarchies into these four groups--they instantly fell into
place at that point--then it was very obvious that each
holarchy in each group was indeed dealing with the same
territory, but overall had four different territories, so to
speak.

-- [[bib:wilbur:1996wilbur][A Brief History of Everything]] p72-73 | Ken Wilbur
#+end_quote

#+CAPTION: Wilbur's Four Holarchy Quadrants
#+ATTR_ORG: :width 500px
[[./img/holon/wilber--four-quadrants.png]]

#+begin_quote
So the question then became, how did these four types of
holarchies relate to each other?  They couldn't just be
radically different holistic sequences.  They had to touch
each other somehow.

Eventually it dawned on me that these four quadrants have an
incredibly simple foundation.  These four types of
holarchies are actually dealing with the /inside/ and
/outside/ of a holon, in both its /individual/ and
/collective/ forms--and that gives us four quadrants.

Inside and outside, singular and plural--some of the
simplest distinctions we can make, and these very simple
features, which are present in all holons, generate these
generate these very simple features, which are present in
all holons, generate these four quadrants, or so I
maintain.  All four of these holarchies are dealing with
real aspects of real holons--which is why these four types
of holarchies keep aggressively and insistently showing up
on the various maps around the world.....

The four quadrants are the /interior/ and /exterior/ of the
/individual/ and the /collective/....

We can start with the individual holon, in both its interior
and exterior aspects.  In  other words, with the Upper Left
quadrant and the Upper Right quadrant.  Figure 5-3 is a
little more detailed map of these two quadrants.


   #+CAPTION: figure 5-3

   | *UPPER LEFT*          | *UPPER RIGHT*                           |
   |-----------------------+-----------------------------------------|
   | prehension            | atoms                                   |
   | irritability          | cells (genetic)                         |
   | rudimentary sensation | metabolic organisms (e.g. coelenterata) |
   | perception            | neuronal organisms (e.g. annelids)      |
   | perception/impulse    | neural cord (fish/amphibians)           |
   | impulse/emotion       | brain stem (reptiles)                   |
   | emotion/image         | limbic system (paleomammals)            |
   | symbols               | neocortex (primates)                    |
   | concepts              | complex neocortex (humans)              |
 
If you look at the Right Hand column first, you can see the
typical holarchy presented in any standard biology
textbook.  Each level transcends and includes its
predecessor.  Each level includes the basics of the previous
level and then adds its own distincting and defining
characteristics, it's own emergents.  Each of these follow
the twenty tenents and so on.

But notice that these are all exterior descriptions--it's
what these holons look like from the outside, in an
objective and empirical manner.  Thus, in a scientific text,
you will find the limbic system, for example, described in
detail--its components, its biochemistry, when and how it
evolved, how it relates to other parts of the organism, and
so on.  And you will probably find it mentioned that the
limbic system is the home of very certain very fundemental
/emotions/, certain basic types of sex and aggression and
fear and desire, whetherthat limbic system appears in horses
or humans or apes.

But if those emotions, of course, you will not find much
dfescription, because emotions pertain to the /interior
experience/ of the limbic system.  And /objective/
scientific descriptions are not much interested in that
interior consciousness, because that interior space cannot
be accessed in an objective, empirical fashion.  You can
only /feel/ these feelings from within.  When you experience
a sort of primal joy, for example, even if you are a brain
physiologist, you do not say to yourself, Waw, what a limbic
dat.  Rather, you describe these feelings in intimate,
personal, emortional terms, /subjective/ terms: I feel
wonderful, it's great to be alive, or whatnot.

So in the Left Hand column, you can see a list of some of
the basic types of /subjective/ or /interior awareness/ that
go with these variopus /objective/ or /exterior forms/
listed in the Right Column.  "Irritability"--the capacity to
actively respond to environmental stimuli--begins with
cells.  Sensations emerge with neuronal organisms, and
perceptions emerge with the neural cord.  Impulses emerge
with a brain stem, and basic emotions with a limbic system.
And so on.

This is also a holarchy, but a subjective or interior
holarchy.  Each level also transcends and includes it[s]
predecessor, each follows the twenty tenents, and so on.
And this Left Hand holarchy, like the Right Hand, is based
on extensive evidence already available, which we can
discuss if you want.

But the main point is that this Left Hand dimension refers
to the inside, to the /interior depth/ that is
/conciousness/ itself.

.... The Left Hand is what the holon looks like from within;
the Right Hand is what the same holon looks like from
without.  Interior and exterior.  Consciousness and form.
Subjective and objective.

.... We don't have to agree with the exact placement of
everything in figure 5-3, but most people would agree that
/something/ like that is occurring.

-- [[bib:wilbur:1996wilbur][A Brief History of Everything]] p73-76 | Ken Wilbur
#+end_quote

#+CAPTION: Details of Four Holarchy Quadrants
#+ATTR_ORG: :width 500px
[[./img/holon/wilber--quadrant-details.png]]


Now about the lower half, the collective.....

#+begin_quote
... Individual holons exist exist /only in compunities/ of
simular-depth holons.  So we beed to go through both of the
columns in figure 5-3 and find the types of /communal/
holons that are always associated with the /individual/
holons.

-- [[bib:wilbur:1996wilbur][A Brief History of Everything]] p77- | Ken Wilbur
#+end_quote

And the Lower Left and Lower Right are "cultural" and
"social" holarchies.

#+begin_quote
... "cultural" refers to all of the /interior/ meanings and
values and identities that we share with those of similar
communities, whether it is a tribal community or a national
community or a world community.  And "social" refers to all
of the exterior, material, institutional /forms/ of the
community, from its techno-economic base to its
architectural styles to its written codes to its population
size, to name a few.

So in a very general sense, "cultural" refers to the shared
collective /worldview/ and "social" refers to the /material
base/ of that worldview.  (Of course, right now I'm just
talking about how these appear in human holons; we'll
discuss nonhuman in a moment.)  Social means any objective,
concrete, material components, and especially the
techno-economic base, so you see these listed as foraging,
horticultural, agrarian, industriall; and the geopolitical
structures of villages, states, world federation, and so
on.  These are all examples of the exterior forms of the
collective, as you can see in figure 5-2.

-- [[bib:wilbur:1996wilbur][A Brief History of Everything]] p77-78 | Ken Wilbur
#+end_quote

Now non-human holons....


#+begin_quote
If consciousness is depth, and depth goes all the way down,
then shared depth or common depth also goes all the way
down--culture goes all the way down... In other words, if
holons share outsides, they share insides....

By the culture or worldspace of holons, I simply mean a
shared space of what they /can/ respond to: quarks do not
respond to all stimuli in the environment, because they
/register/ a very narrow range of what will have meaning to
them, what will /affect/ them.  Quarks (and all holons)
respond only to that which /fits their worldspace/:
everything else is a foreign language, and they are
outsiders.  The study of what holons /can/ respond to is the
study of shared worldspaces.  It's the common world that all
holons of a similar depth will respond to.  That is their
shared culture.

[for example] Nonhuman cultures can be very sophisticated.
Wolves, for example, share an emotional worldspace.  They
possess a limbic system, the interior correlate of which is
certain basic emotions.  And thus a wolf orients itself and
its fellow wolves to the world through the use of these
basic emotional cognitions--not just reptilian and
sensorimotor, but affective.  They can hunt and coordinate
in packs through a very sophisticated emotional signal
systems.  They share this emotional worldspace.

Yet anything /outside/ that worldspace is /not registered//
I mean you can read /Hamlet/ to them, but no luck.  What you
are, with that book, is basically dinner plus a few things
that will have to be spat out.

The point is that a holon responds, and /can respon/ only to
those stimuli that fall within its worldspace, its
worldview.  Everything else is nonexistent....

Same with humans.  By the time evolution reaches the
neocortex, or the complex triune brain, with its interior
correlates of images and symbols and concepts, these basic
worldspaces have become articulated into rather
sophisticated cognitive structures.  These worldspaces
/incorporate/ the basic componments of the previous
world-spaces-- such as cellular irritability amd reptilian
instincts and paleo-mammalian emotionss--but they /add/ new
components that articulate or unfold new worldviews.

Remember, the Kosmos looks diferent at each of these stages
because the Kosmos /is/ different at each of these stages.
At each of thes stages, the Kosmos looks at itself with new
eyes, and thus brings forth new worlds not previously
existing.

These cultural worldspaces are listed on Lower Left.  And
you an see they they evolve from phsycical and vegetative
and reptiliand ("uroboric"--of the serpent) and
limbic-emotional ("typhonic"), into more specifically
hominid and then human forms: archaic, magic, mythic,
rational, centauric (or existential), and possible higher
stages yet to come.

These worldview are correlated with the /exterior/ forms of
the /social structures/ that support each of those
worldviews and the individuals within them--again, all the
way down.  For example, from the prokaryotic Gaia system to
societies with a division of labor (in neural organisms) to
groups/families of paleomammals to the more human forms of:
/foraging/ tribes to /horticultural/ villages to /agrariam/
empires to /industrial/ states to /informational/ global
federation.  Which is the list to date, as reconstructed
from available evidence.  These are all listed on the Lower
Right.

Q: And these four quadrants are related to each other in
exactly what fashion?

KW: In any fasion you want.  Just don't reduce them one to
another.  I have some specific thoughts on this, but right
now I don't want to push my own theory in this regard.  I
will settle for the /orienting generalization/ that we
simply cannot reduce these quadrants to each other without
profound distortions and violent ruptures.  So let us grant
each of them a certain integrity, I think.  Let's just say
they interrelate, or they interact, or they each have
correlates in the others.  That's plenty to work with.  When
we talk about the different truths in each quadrant, I think
you'll see what I mean.

-- [[bib:wilbur:1996wilbur][A Brief History of Everything]] p78- | Ken Wilbur
#+end_quote





* Evaluating Assertations

Requirements:

  - trustless
  - tamperproof, or at least highly tamper resistent
  - scales, from very short to very very long time frames and physical
    scales.
  - not require expert training or knowledge to participate
  - self-sustaining
  - meet requirements for establishing facts and truth that would be
    acceptable in most courts of law.


** Corruption aka noise aka errors aka 4%t08^w*4e;j

When you transmit something you are making a copy.  That
copy may only need to go from a USB drive to a Hard disk on
a laptop, or could be something like the Rosetta Stone which
has managed to send a message in multiple languages -- one
of which, Egyptian hieroglyphics that had been forgotten
when it was unearthed.  The Rosetta Stone succeeded in
sending it's message because it was encoded in multiple
languages, by added redundancy that made it more resiliant.

Everything from Morse Code to TCP/IP is all about dealing
with transmission/copying errors and correcting for noise,
for corruption.

** Truth

#+begin_quote
There are trivial truths and there are great truths.  The
opposite of a trivial truth is plainly false.  The opposite
of a great truth is also true.

-- Neils Bohr
#+end_quote


#+begin_verse
The truth is hard.
The truth is hidden.
The truth must be pursued.
The truth is harder to hear.
The truth is rarely simple.
The truth isn't so obvious.
The truth is necessary.
The truth can't be glossed over.
The truth has no agenda.
The truth can't be manufactured.
The truth doesn't take sides.
The truth isn't red or blue.
The truth is hard to accept.
The truth pulls no punches.
The truth is powerful.
The truth is under attack.
The truth is worth defending.
The truth requires taking a stand.
The truth is more important now than ever.

-- The New York Times Advertisment 2017
   [[http://thehill.com/media/320787-new-york-times-launches-major-ad-campaign-the-truth][New York Times launches major ad campaign: 'The Truth']] | TheHill
#+end_verse


In many cases, truth somewhat falls short of being absolute.  This is
the reality of complexity -- complex systems can be described but
nevery absolutely defined.

In Science there are Laws and Theorys -- a Law is absolute, a theory
has not been yet proved to be absolute.  There are many theories which
are accepted as being as absolute, such as the theory of evolution --
but because evolution can never be defined as cleaning as say the
Second Law of Thermodynamics, it will most certainly be a Law in the
forseeable future.

It is important that we make the effort to determine what assertions
are more true than others because this is the only rational means of
making decsions.  The act of taking in information about what has
changed around you, determining what happened, if it is true or not
before making a decision is how we survive from minute to minute.
This is the process used to cross a busy street, to eat or not to eat
the leftover curry that has been sitting forgotten in the fridge since
the New Years party and has a number of things growing in it which may
or may not be classifiable as a new form of intelligent life.

So determining how reliable, or the confidence level we have that any
particular assertation is true is important.  In fact that it is the
single most important thing we do as living creatures.  This needs to
be at the very core of all information system -- and sure enough, in
human cognitive processes, pattern recognition is made using a
hierarchical system of pattern matchers -- when a pattern matcher
looks at something, it tells the matchers in the levels above and
below if there is a match, or not a match and how certain it is of it
being a match or not.

Determining if something is true is broken down into two
parts, /authentication/ and /authorization/, which most
people associate with logging into online services, or
withdrawing money from a bank account.  The principle is the
same.  When you log into your account on Google, you must
present the system with a means of identifying and
demonstrating that you are who you say you are
/authtication/, and then Google checks this information
against it's records and grants or denies you access to your
account.

By applying this process to any assertation we can determine
the level of confidence that we have in the truth of an
assertation or not.

Before we go any further we need to address another thorny
issue -- trust.

Because authentication and authorization is difficult, in
almost all mechanisms that determine truth, we use /trusted/
agents that used to authenticate and authorize on our
behalf.  We use banks as go-betweens to transfer funds that
are trusted by both parties.  Trusted libaries are used to
compile databases of /authorities/ which are used to match
authors to works that claim to be their works.  Wikipedia is
quickly becoming one such /authority/.  In Western
democracies, a Free Press' role is to provide information
about what a government is using that is independent of what
the government is telling people.  This only works when the
Press is trusted.  When people are bombarded by propaganda,
and dissinformation by governments or groups who are trying
to promote an ideology or gain power, that trust breaks down
and the role of the Press is undermined.  This is what has
happened in the United States over a twenty year period by
one political party which lead to the election of Donald
Trump.  Once that trust has been destroyed, it creates a
vacuum that threatens to destroy functional societies.  This
is a poor strategy because the groups who undermine such
trust historically don't stay in power for very long,
because without a foundation of information that can be
trusted they have lost all of their credibility and have
hurt themselves as much as their opponents.

This is why it's so interesting that BitCoin and its great
innovation the /blockchain/ was invented during this period
of large scale disinformation and errosion of trust in the
truth of assertations that have been made.


             *SECTION On How BitCoin Works*


The blockchain provides us with a means of establishing certainty
between two parties even if neither party trust the other.

A bitcoin transaction is trusted because of the blockchain
mechanism is not only trusted but transparent and
verifiable.  This moves trust outside of human institutions
which are, by definition, fallible.  There is now an
enormous amount of effort being made in a large number of
fields and industries to apply blockchain concepts to things
which have nothing to do with currencies, finance or
transactions.


** Provenance

[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Provenance][Provenance]] - Wikipedia

Provenance is the chain or chronoology of the ownership,
custody or location of a historical object.

The idea is simple -- and it works like the /duck/
principle.  If something looks like a duck, quaks like a
duck and walks like a duck, it's probably a duck.

The provenance of an object is something where a number of
true statements have been collected that provide evidence
that the object is what it is claimed to be.

The more verifible facts that can be collected about the
object the greater the confidence that one has in it's
authenticity.

This principle applies to many things in our lives, and is
the primary method used to authenticate anything.  This is
why it is common to demand that two forms of identification
that includes a picture be produced to authenticate that a
person is who they claim to be.

Two factor authorization is a fairly new wrinkle but is no
different -- the more verifible or trusted facts that can be
presented, the higher the confidence level is that what is
being claimed is true.

** Primary Sources

  - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_source][Primary source]] | Wikipedia

Verification (authentication) of assertations can be made
using a combination of /primary/ and /secondary/ sources.


#+begin_quote
A history, whose author draws conclusions from other than
primary sources or secondary sources actually based on
primary sources, is by definition fiction and not history at
all.

— Kameron Searle
#+end_quote


For verification of a name primary documents such as birth,
death, baptism, marriage and death certificates, offical
identification credentials such as passports and drivers
licences may be used.

-------


Determining if something is a primary or secondary source is
largely determined by context.

A review of a book treats the text of the book as a primary
source for the review, but the reviewed book in turn might
be based on any number of other primary sources which are
then based on other primary sources etc.

For example, William Caxton used Sir Thomas Mallory's text
as a primary source for /Le Morte Dr Arthur/ which was as
much Caxton's work as it was Malory.  Malory's orginal text
which survives in the Winchester Manuscript was in turn
based on a great many different older texts by other, mostly
unknown authors.

In other words, as in so many other things, it's turtles all
the way down.

*** Wikipedia's Prime Directive

 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research#Primary.2C_secondary_and_tertiary_sources][Wikipedia:No original research]] | Wikipedia

Just as the crew of the Starship Enterprise was constrained
by the [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_Directive][Prime Directive]], Wikipedia is constrained by three
core principles that apply to all content: a) [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view][Neutral point
of view]] of view, b) [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:No_original_research#Primary.2C_secondary_and_tertiary_sources][No original research]] and c)
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Verifiability][Verifiability]].

We are concerned here with /no original research/ which
disallows direct use of primary source material in articles.

Their argument is that Wikipedia is an encyplopedia that is
a summary of existing thought, not original thoughts or
ideas. So all assertations in Wikipedia must point to
secondary sources.

#+begin_quote
In general, the most reliable sources are:

  - Peer-reviewed journals
  - Books published by university presses
  - University-level textbooks
  - Magazines, journals, and books published by respected
    publishing houses.
  - Mainstream newspapers
#+end_quote 

This is how encyclopedias are supposed to be compiled.  But
these limitations, that are critical to establishing an
encyclopedia as being authoritative, does not always apply
to other types of works.

Authority records are one of them.



** Chain of Custody

  - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chain_of_custody][Chain of custody]] | Wikipedia

A chain of custody can be part of establishing provenance or
any evidence that is used to establish the veracity of an
assertation.

#+begin_quote
Establishing chain of custody is made of both a
chronological and logical procedure, especially important
when the evidence consists of fungible goods. In practice,
this most often applies to illegal drugs which have been
seized by law enforcement personnel. In such cases, the
defendant at times disclaims any knowledge of possession of
the controlled substance in question. Accordingly, the chain
of custody documentation and testimony is presented by the
prosecution to establish that the substance in evidence was
in fact in the possession of the defendant.

  - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chain_of_custody][Chain of custody]] | Wikipedia
#+end_quote

Once a fact has been established -- with assertations that
are linked to primary sources we need to established these
as a chain of custody.  Links to sources must include a hash
of the source and recorded in the blockchain -- this ensure
that records have not been tampered with.

Actually it doesn't do that -- it is still possible to
tamper with records, but to do so means going back and
changing so many things that are dependent on each other
that the cost of tampering exceeds the benefit or resrouces
availble to do so.

** LOC Authority Records

 - [[https://www.loc.gov/marc/authority/][MARC 21 Format for Authority Data]] | MARC Standards, LOC


#+begin_quote
Traditionally, the purpose of authority control has been to
bring consistency to library catalogs.  The authority
control process is directed at the access points contained
in catalog records i.e., names, titles, and subjects.  It
ensures that these access points are unique and consistent
in in content and form, and provides a network of linkages
for variant and related headings in the catalog.  Reference
to an authority file maintains consistency in controlled
access points, while cross-references and the adjacent
display of identical access points have been the primary
methods used to accomplish the neccessary linkages in the
catalog.

-- [[bib:vellucci:2011metadata][Metadata and authority control]] | Sherry Vellucci
#+end_quote


#+begin_quote
The MARC 21 Format for Authority Data is designed to be a
carrier for information concerning the authorized forms of
names, subjects, and subject subdivisions to be used in
constructing access points in MARC records, the forms of
these names, subjects, and subject subdivisions that should
be used as references to the authorized forms, and the
interrelationships among these forms. A name may be used as
a main, added, series, or subject access entry.

-- [[https://www.loc.gov/marc/authority/adintro.html][MARC 21 Format for Authority Data: Introduction]] | MARC, LOC
#+end_quote

The now ubiquitious hypertext link that makes the Web, the
Web links everything to everything, but does not have any
mechanism to determine what links relate to what persons,
places, works or concepts.  An authority record is used to
distinquish Apple (fruit) from Apple (Consumer Electronics
Company)[fn:1]

** Facts

Assertations -- which are determined to have a high
confidence level that they are true are called /facts/.

That said, there are not facts in isolation -- a fact is a
network of assertations that are by consenus, considered to
be true within a given context.

Let's take a simple assertation from a beloved piece of
literature:

#+begin_center
"Marley was dead."
#+end_center

Most of us would think that such a simple assertation would
be straight forward, but this is Charles Dickens, who was
being paid by the word...

#+begin_quote
Marley was dead, to begin with. There is no doubt whatever
about that.  The register of his burial was signed by the
clergyman, the clerk, the undertaker, and the chief
mourner. Scrooge signed it. And Scrooge's name was good upon
'Change for anything he chose to put his hand to. Old Marley
was as dead as a door-nail.

Mind! I don't mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge,
what there is particularly dead about a door-nail. I might
have been inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the
deadest piece of ironmongery in the trade. But the wisdom of
our ancestors is in the simile; and my unhallowed hands
shall not disturb it, or the Country's done for. You will,
therefore, permit me to repeat, emphatically, that Marley
was as dead as a door-nail.

-- A Christmas Carol | Charles Dickens
#+end_quote

We have already, in two short paragraphs, established a
formidible case for the establishment of the truth of
Marley's death.

The Death Register, which is a government document, as well
as being a primary source declares Marley's demise.

The Register entry includes evidence that a consensus was
reached to this assertion.  The consensus was not made in
comments on facebook or even a blizzard of Tweets, no, it
was formed by a number of persons who are considered to be,
because of their official position, to be trusted sources,
including a Priest who would have seen Marley's body as part
of his duties as clergyman and are often thought provide
trustworthy testimony, a government Clerk whose job is to
verify that records such as this are composed according to
institutional rules, practices and perhaps even laws of the
City of London.  It was signed by the undertaker, who also
would be a reliable witness and who had extensive experience
in knowing if someone was dead or not.  We don't really know
the veractity of the chief mourner, as this was 19th century
England and it was common practice to hire mourners,
especially in the case as someone who was so universally
unloved as Jacob Marley.  But again, unless the chief
mourner had been paid to decieve us, it would also be
logical to assume that the other witnesses would have to
been part of some kind of conspiracy.  Such a hypothesis
does not pass Occums Razor and can be safely discounted.
And finally Marley's long time partner, E. Scrooge signed
the document, who, as was mentioned was "good upon 'Change
for anything he chose to put his hand to".

You might think that it would have been enough to quote the
first paragraph as being sufficient.  But it's interesting
that Dicken's went on to state that not only was Marley was
dead, but "dead as a door-nail" which, I suppose is not only
making the statement that he is dead, but stating that he
was "emphatially" dead, which is not so much providing the
degree to which he was dead, after all dead is dead, just as
you can't be a little bit pregnant, it is a binary statement
-- one is either, dead, or alive.  In the case of Dicken's
story, it was important to stress this assertation to the
reader who would find themselves confronting Marley's ghost,
in conversation with Scrooge only a few pages later.  It was
important that the reader understood that Marley was dead
when he entered Scrooge's bedroom who was now a
manifestation of the living Marley, now turned into a
miserable and tortured specter who had been tasked to
forewarn his partner of old.

Next we come to the interesting thing about irreversible
single direction state changes -- they are bound by an event
that tips the state from one to the other.  They are bound
by time.  So /when/ the statement /Marley was dead/ was
asserted, determines if the assertion is true or not.

Dicken's used the word /was/ and not /is/ because the story
was told using the third person, so everything in the story
happened in the past.  The statement can only be judged true
if it was made after he died, and would not be true if it
was made while he was alive.  This is actually quite
important, Paul McCartney of the Beatles found in
1966.[fn:2] So, we would assume that the death register
would record some other details, including the date and
perhaps place and cause of his death.

Next, Dickens assumed that we have a general consensus of
what constitutes death as opposed to the more recent concept
of [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clinical_death][clinical death]].  Death is the point after which something
can no longer be revived.  For humans, unless there is some
breakthrough in cryogenic suspended animation, it is quite
short.  However, some creatures such as the hardy little
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tardigrade][tardigrade]] have been known to be able to [[http://www.bbc.com/earth/story/20150313-the-toughest-animals-on-earth][revive]] after being
frozen for hundreds of years.

I mention this because when thinking about facts that are
true over very long time frames, even the most rock-solid
concepts like death might change quite radically in the
distant future.  We can not take cultural assumptions of our
time and apply them to others.

    *Continue to talk about assumptions about Proper names,
    computer understandable vs human understandable and then
    put it all together into an example of all the
    information needed for the statement Marley was Dead to
    be true.*

    This section will need to be moved to the end -- as a
    means of putting together everyhing -- from assertation
    to truth and belief, chain of custody etc.

** Consensus

  - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Consensus][Wikipedia:Consensus]] | Wikipedia

Consensus is a /process/ which is completed, it is not
absolute, it will always be a snapshot -- consensus can
change depending on how the surrounding context changes.


#+begin_quote
Consensus decision-making is a group decision-making process
in which group members develop, and agree to support a
decision in the best interest of the whole. Consensus may be
defined professionally as an acceptable resolution, one that
can be supported, even if not the "favourite" of each
individual. Consensus is defined by Merriam-Webster as,
first, general agreement, and second, group solidarity of
belief or sentiment. It has its origin in the Latin word
cōnsēnsus (agreement), which is from cōnsentiō meaning
literally feel together. It is used to describe both the
decision and the process of reaching a decision. Consensus
decision-making is thus concerned with the process of
deliberating and finalizing a decision, and the social,
economic, legal, environmental and political effects of
using this process.

-- [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_decision-making][Consensus decision-making]]  Wikipedia
#+end_quote

Consensus is /not/ a /majority/, or /unanimity/


#+begin_quote
As a decision-making process, consensus decision-making aims
to be:

  - Agreement Seeking :: A consensus decision making process
       attempts to generate as much agreement as
       possible.[2]
  - Collaborative :: Participants contribute to a shared proposal and
    shape it into a decision that meets the concerns of all group
    members as much as possible.[3]
  - Cooperative :: Participants in an effective consensus process should
    strive to reach the best possible decision for the group and all
    of its members, rather than competing for personal preferences.
  - Egalitarian :: All members of a consensus decision-making body
    should be afforded, as much as possible, equal input into the
    process. All members have the opportunity to present, and amend
    proposals.
  - Inclusive :: As many stakeholders as possible should be involved in
    the consensus decision-making process.
  - Participatory :: The consensus process should actively solicit the
    input and participation of all decision-makers.[4]

-- [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_decision-making][Consensus decision-making]]  Wikipedia
#+end_quote




The term consensus has changed over time, and it is often wrongly used
to indicate other things like 


*** Truth by Consensus

  - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_by_consensus][Truth by consensus]]  | Wikipedia

Consensus is a poor way of arriving at truth in itself.


** Belief

:TL;DR: this section should paint belief as a tricky beast
-- in one respect can seen as having confidence in a world
model.  But when beliefs continue to be held that are
contrary to newer models that have replaced them we become
increasingly dysfunctional. This is important because
determining if something is or is not a fact never has an
end, change one thing, and everything else changes relative
to it.  A fact in classical Athens might be very different
from a fact in 19th Century Tokyo that could be very
different from 21st Century Phnom Penh.  So it is just as
important to establish facts as it is to establish what the
context was for it to be a fact.  As contexts change, so is
what is excepted as facts and our belief in them.





#+begin_quote
Alice laughed. ‘There’s no use trying,’ she said: ‘one can’t
believe impossible things.’

‘I daresay you haven’t had much practice,’ said the
Queen. ‘When I was your age, I always did it for
half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve believed as many as
six impossible things before breakfast.”

― Lewis Carroll
#+end_quote

If you don't, at any given time of the day, hold in your
head any number of contradictory, foolish, incorrect,
dangerous and even down right impossible things then you are
not human.

It's all we can do, to take in sensory information and
construct a model of what's going on outside our heads that
doesn't get us killed.  That in itself is a remarkable
achievement.  Human cognition is a messy business and we
might as well accept that the best we can do is work around
it those limitations, for our own sake and well as others.

This does not give us licence to believe anything that pops
into our heads.  Our survival as individuals and as a
species depends on us getting it right more often than we
get it wrong.  As soon as you willfully decide to believe in
things which are empirically and obviously not true you
start sliding down a water park ride with no water at the
bottom to break your fall.

Belief does not make a thing real or true.  But the further
beliefs that contradict objective empirical reality, the
more disfunctional we become as individuals and societies.

What constitutes empircal reality is relative to the
empirical evidence we have at any given time. Beliefs that
are patently wrong today were at one time the best guess
that the brightest people at the time could come up with.

The earth was at the center of the universe, and then the
solar system, and then of course it wasn't.  It's not that
before Copernicus that the Sun actually revolved around the
earth, but for all practical purposes, to the people who
believed it, it was.  But once Copernicus improved the model
of the world to better fit what was observed, it became
true, until it wasn't and Galileo came along with his bloody
telescopes that upset the Roman Catholic Church so much that
he was not officially forgiven until the 20th century.

You do the best to create a model of the world and how it
works with what you have at hand.  It's perfectly fine to
base beliefs and make descions based on those models.  But
once that model has been replaced with a better model, then
hanging on to those older beliefs is not sane and lowers
your chance of survival.

An outmoded belief that is being kept around is an ideoology
-- ideologies often start off as perfectly good models of
the world.  But ideologies attempt to freeze a model and
insist that it can not be improved or altered.  At this
point, as one would say in a version control system, that
the main branch had been forked and over time became
increasingly out of sync with the main branch.

We as individuals and as societies are constantly telling
ourselves, our children and our neighbors all sorts of
nonsense.  Newborn babies are delivered by storks, an
archetypal minor diety comes into your bedroom in your sleep
and replaces a fallen tooth with hard currency.[fn:3]

If someone hears voices or believes that they are talking to
a giant rabbit named Harvey is seen as evidence of a mental
break with reality.  But going to a large building and
praying to something that you have been told exists but
hasn't left any material evidence of it's existence is
considered perfectly sane.  But only if you don't act on
those beliefs in similar ways that xxxxx acted when he
talked to Harvey.  We are expected to pay lip service to our
beliefs, but acting on them is another thing.

These beliefs are vanquished as one grows up, but other
preposterous beliefs are only reinforced, the world was
created in 6 days less than ten thousand years ago.  A flood
covered the entire planet for xx days, to a height of xxx
feet, but there is no explanation for where the water came
from or where it went afterwords.  And all species of
animals that exist today survived the flood in a wooden boat
that wouldn't even rate as a small cruise liner today.  The
animals that didn't make it onto the boat, dinosaurs and the
like, perished.  Beliefs like these are expected to be
believed literally, though people are not expected to
actually live as if these things actually occured because
they would die.

Then there are lesser beliefs that persist though they have
long been debunked.  Eating carrots gives you 20/20
eyesight, reading in poor lightings damages your eyesight,

and pretty much anything good that people believe about
Donald Trump.


--- I remember reading a book on UFOs in the 1970's that had
a wonderful comment to the effect, that "the interior of all
alien space craft looked like the interior of a '57 Buick"


** Meaning

#+begin_comment
NOTES <2013-03-24 Sun 08:29> meaning and the observer
NOTES <2013-03-25 Mon 22:03> More musings on meaning
#+end_comment

In the prologue to The Information, Gleick made a wonderful ==== of
how fuzzy archaic words were adopted by Newton, Einstein and Shannon
and given concrete scientific definitions which have meanings that can
be mathematically defined. 


#+BEGIN_QUOTE
For the purposes of science, /information/ had to mean something
special. Three centuries earlier, the new discipline of physics could
not proceed until Isaac Newton appropriated words that were ancient
and vague—/force/, /mass/, /motion/, and even /time/—and gave them new
meanings. Newton made these terms into quantities, suitable for use in
mathematical formulas. Until then, /motion/ (for example) had been
just as soft and inclusive a term as /information/. For Aristotelians,
motion covered a far-flung family of phenomena: a peach ripening, a
stone falling, a child growing, a body decaying.  That was too
rich. Most varieties of motion had to be tossed out before Newton’s
laws could apply and the Scientific Revolution could succeed. In the
nineteenth century, /energy/ began to undergo a similar transformation:
natural philosophers adapted a word meaning vigor or intensity. They
mathematicized it, giving energy its fundamental place in the
physicists’ view of nature.

It was the same with information. A rite of purification became
necessary.

-- The Information
   James Gleick (Prologue)
#+END_QUOTE

I think we need a more concrete idea of what meaning is.  Wheeler used
Fø11esdal's definition:

   "Meaning is the joint product of all the evidence that is
    available to those who communicate."

That doesn't quite cut it -- I think it would be better to define
meaning along the lines of:

   "context of something that is observed."
   "context fixed by the act of observation."

I almost wrote that as "associative context" but that would place
meaning into the realm of being an cognitive function of the observer.
We need a non-anthropic definition here.

Observeration, like meaning, is also something that is both relative
and often subjective.

Separating meaning from the human cognitive process is difficult.  To
be able to do so we must discard the concept of subjectivity from
meaning.  Subjectivity is a result of our very imperfect cognitive
process, false conclusions drawn from misinterpreted patterns
recognized by the brain.  

So meaning is not subjective so much as relative in that it is
determined by the POV and LOD of the observation.

If state is determined by observation, and state is, in effect, a
binary on or off state, then any context is determined by the act of
observation. This works well with Shannon's divorce of information
from meaning -- a binary state has no meaning, but the observed
context of that state gives it meaning.

My definition deprives 'meaning' of a number of different meanings of
meaning in that it strips meaning of any sense of being absolute,
eternal, spiritual or even terribly important.

So what do we get from our newly minted definition that we didn't have
before?

Rereading the Epilogue of Glieck's /The Information/ I'm reminded at
how disappointed I was.  After all, the subtitle for the chapter was
"The Return of Meaning," and after having read hundreds of pages
hammering home the point that in a post-Shannon world, information has
no meaning, that in the final pages he would bring back some of the
hope taken from us in previous chapters.  I suppose he did... after a
fashion.

What he gave us was Google and Big Data folksen, that the Internet is
unstructured chaos and that there is only meaning in the aggregate.
That is not because of anything fundamental about Shannon's lack of
meaning in information, it's because meaning depends on context, and
most unstructured data on the Internet lacks the context to be
meaningful.  So you need need to pull together a lot of unstructured
data and then do some very heavy processing to get meaning out of it.

Big Data works like a gold mine that needs to process several tons of
rock and soil to distill even a single ounce of gold.  It's messy,
requires massive brute force machinery and sophisticated techniques.
The approach is only cost effective if the cost of gold is
prohibitively high.  For Big Data, the rock crushing and sifting is
done by a process called Map-Reduce that works something like this:

   Collect information from any number of sources in any format, do
   some minimal processing to it, like indexing keywords, and then
   break it into chunks.  Each chunk is sent to a different computer
   which strains the chunk through algorithmic sieves that identify
   patterns.  When each computer (there might be tens or even hundreds
   of thousands of computers employed) finishes, it sends it's answer
   to another computer which merges all of the answers together by
   running them through another algorithm and spit out a result.

It's a lot of work to distill a small amount of meaning.  This is not
to say that the approach is not useful.  In fact it is so useful that
it is triggering a revolution that will recast how information is
processed in a fundemental way.  But it's not very fine-grained.  It's
like using a Tomahawk missle to kill a mouse.

Part of the problem is with data structures.  Most information on the
Internet is structured as documents, blobs (binary objects like
images, audio and video) and tabular data (spreadsheets, databases
etc).  Computers are designed to store these data structures verbatim,
as if they were physical media.  And in many respects the way we
structure and store data is still a close digital analog to physical
media formats of the past.  These formats have evolved over centuries
to be effective means of communicating information on paper across
time between people.  This is very different from how the Brain stores
and processes information.

The brain doesn't store visual information in memory like a camera.
First it spatially identifies and maps objects within it's visual
field.  This is why the vast number of creatures on our planet have at
least two eyes, stereoscopic vision makes it easier to differentiate
objects at close distances where most immediate threats to survival
are located.  Next, objects are evaluated and prioritized according to
what appears to be important or of interest and details are noted and
stored about those objects as associative memories of those objects.
If an object is recognized, (this is a chair) an association is made
to that concept rather than making a new concept and then specific
details about that object are made as new memories.  When we remember
something we have seen, we don't retrieve an image, we recreate that
image from the shards of associations and memories we have about
something.  This is not readily apparent when you live in a single
place all your life.  We start chunking associations about the world
from birth.  And since most people live within a single culture within
a rather small geographical compass, the vast majority of things we
encounter every day are familiar.  So even if you enter a building
that you have never been in before, most of the objects within the
building are familiar, so the brain is able to focus on many small
details of what is different in a room, often in a great detail.  So
when a memory of that room is recalled, the brain is able to assemble
a very detailed model of what was seen in that room.  This is very
different from when you travel to a foreign country where the culture
and material life is very different from what you are accustomed to.
If you have only visited the country for a short time, the culture
shock is exhausting because your brain is working overtime trying to
assimilate so many new classes of objects and try to make sense of
them.  It is also remarkable how little detail you can remember as
well.  Memories of a small number of specific types of objects might
be quite vivid and detailed while others may not be recalled at all.

The contrast between how information is stored by humans on physical
media (or on the Internet), and how the brain organizes and stores
information could not be more different.  Documents and images are an
attempt at capturing and recording our brain's attempts at assembling
and recreating memories.  This is the brain's version of Map-Reduce.
We think we are remembering a camera-like image, when we are really
creating those images from many different parts.  This is an important
point because all of those parts, to one degree or another, have
meaning.  The assembled memory is the ounce of gold after crushing and
sifting tons of raw material, but is only the tip of the iceberg in
terms of all of the meaning that makes up the constituent parts.
Google and Big Data are at a tremendous disadvantage because all they
have to work with are those assembled memories in the form of
documents, images, tabular data etc. which contain relatively little
or no meaning because they are out of context.

What is needed is a clear understanding of what is meant by meaning
and how to use it in capturing, storing and processing information.
In Shannon's definition of information there is no meaning.  A single
binary /on/ or /off/ has no meaning, because it has no context.  If
someone shouted out to you the word "down" for no apparent reason, it
has no meaning.  But if they said "the Internet is down again," the
statement has meaning, even to an English speaking time traveler from
the 19th century who knows nothing about 21st century technology.
Because even the time travler will know that something called the
"Internet" is "down" and that this has happened before.  In
otherwords, meaning doesn't exist at the bit level but at the byte
level.  This is similar to how things work differently at quantum
scales than they do at human observable scales.  Meaning requires a
minimum amount of complexity.  That complexity is made of causal
relationships between the bits.  Flip one bit from on to off and the
equilibrium will be broken triggering a cascade that will effect other
bits that depend on it to maintain state.  Some bits will also flip to
another state, others will not.  Such relationships cluster and
recursively nest, so you get a classic /butterfly effect/ rippling
through the system until it once more reaches a state of equilibrium.
This happens at the quantum information level, as quantum states
change which cascade and amplify until it can be seen as aggregate
change at human or even cosmic scales.

Context is tricky.  Meaning requires complexity which is a system with
a high level of order, or low entropy.  But complexity is not enough
to constitute context, it requires /contextual/ complexity.  Context
is not just a mapping of what surrounds something, but a map of the
relationships that surrounds something as well.  Relationships can run
the gamut of things as simple as proximity, to dependencies,
associations as well as thesaurus style broader, narrower, related and
equivilent relationships.  It includes complex social realtionships
like father, mother, child, sibling, friend, spouse, mentor, customer,
teacher etc.  Some relationships are explicitly established and
recorded, others might be inferred or implicit.  But it is that
contextual map of relationships that are the foundational building
blocks of meaning.

A related manifestation of meaning is a /pattern/. A pattern is a
thread of relationships which weaves through a data set as Ariadne's
thread wound through the Minotaur's labrynth.  And just as Theseus's
thread inextricably lead to the heart of the Minotaur, /patterns/ lead
to an ephiphany, (albeit not necessarily divine or transcendent in
nature) that reveal a in part, some deeper understanding of the inner
or broader workings and machinations and processes that make up our
world..  The ability to discern such complex patterns is one of the
fundamental things that sets Homo Sapiens apart from our other close
primate relatives.

A Pattern is a discernible regularity that repeats in a predictable
manner.  Recognition of patterns goes to the heart of meaning, both in
human cognition as well as for Google the Big Data applications.  A
pattern is different from other kinds of meaning in that it is
meaningful typically is derived after the fact, from models built up
from information that has already been observed, recorded and
processed.  In other words, patterns are meaning that is derived from
meaning.

Just as the bizzare world of quantum entanglement requires an
/observer/ to determine state, /meaning/ requires an observer as well,
and for the same reasons.  Does a falling tree in the forest make a
sound if there is no one to hear it?  If the tree has not been
observed by /anything/ directly or indirectly (which theoretically is
possible but only slightly less probable than an ice cube existing at
the core of the star), the answer is both yes and no at the same time.
That is, until the evidence of the fallen tree has been observed after
the fact.  At which time all of the necessary intermediate
consequences of a falling tree /must have/ occured in order for it to
have fallen, including sound.  You can't take the observer out of the
equation.  Moreover, because the observer must observe within
/contextual boundries/, every observation must be relative to its
/PoV/ (Point of View) and the /LoD/ (Level of Detail) of the
observation.

A PoV is the position and orientation, and observational limitations
of an observer relative to what is being observed.  A LoD is the
amount of detail that can can be observed from a given distance.
Tecnically LoD is a subset of PoV, but it is useful as a metric in its
own right because it determines the granuality of what is being
observed.  LoD is a term that comes from computer 3D modeling, which
saves on computer processing time when rendering complex objects by
only rendering a subset of an objects polygons if it is being viewed
from far away.  The reasoning is that if you have a very large model
with tens of thousands of polygons, and you are rendering an image of
it from very faw away, the observer will not be able to view more then
a very small subset of those polygons.  So to save time and money,
only render a small number of polygons for objects that are far away.
LoD turns out to be a very good way of understanding both the scope
and distance that an observer has relative to what is being observed.
It's a /you can't see a forest for the trees/ problem.  You can not
observe a mouse if you are looking at one of it's toes under an
electron microscope, the LOD determines the scope and scale of what is
being observed, the PoV determines the perspective.  Both PoV and LoD
are so important that they have their own chapters in the /Primer/, so
please refer to those chapters for a longer treatment on those
subjects.

So now that we have a foundation for a definition of meaning, we
should consider what other shades of meaning we are excluding or
discarding.  Meaning is often thought to be inseparable from human
subjectivity.  We have discussed how meaning is relative to an
observers PoV and LoD.  But human subjectivity is often viewed as
being both highly personal as well as highly unreliable.  Both of
these limitations are have more to do with the limitations of human
cognition than that of meaning.  The human brain can be thought of as
a relentless pattern recognition system on top of a branching
associative data store.  Because the system has evolved to favor those
who physically survive to reproduce and to see their offspring survive
long enough to reproduce, survival depends more on recognizing lots
and lots of patterns quickly with lots of false positives than slower
identifion of more accurate or precise patterns.  The brain is
designed for a high level of redundancy to help weed out the more
serious false positives that are life threatening, but we aren't so
good at weeding out false positives that don't pose an immediate
threat to survival.  Your chances of survival are far higher if you
mistake the sound of a breaking branch in the jungle to be a tiger
stalking you, than if you don't.  Human cognition is a messy business.
A lot of these false positives are not recognized as such and are
internalized as all sorts of things from folk beliefs, urban legands,
seeing demons and spirits, lottery numbers coming to you in dreams,
mystical visions, bong-hit ephiphanies and the like.  The result is
that meaning from a human cognitive point of view is highly subjective
and more often simply wrong than we would care to admit.  In other
words it is important to allow for our very human cognitive failings
and weaknesses in our definition of meaning.  Meaning is not a measure
of right or wrong, it is not a truth statement.

Another important limitation is that meaning is not ultimate.
Ultimate meanings like "the meaning of life" are, well, meaningless.
Such a meaning would require an omniscient observer who could see
everything everywhere, at even the quantum level, simultaneously; /God
as observer/.  Such an observer would violate quantum causality, as it
would be the god-observer that would decide the fate of the poor cat
in Schrödinger's famous thought experiment.  It would be the
god-observer who would always make an observation before anyone opened
the box.  Any number of theistic belief systems would have no problem
with such a scenario, but it would likely invalidate all sorts of
things like /quantum entaglement/.  Since quantum entanglement is
backed up by substantial experimental evidence, it would seem that
even omniscient god-observers are blind at quantum scales.  Even if a
God observer were possible, any meaning it could observe, would still
could not be ultimate, because that omniscient meaning would not be
any more valid than any other subjective meaning from a narrower
perspectives.

Putting this all together, our working definition is that /meaning is
the context of something fixed by the act of observation/.



** Importance

the only way to establish a fact-based society is to be so
deadly serious that no one will take you seriously

it can only work with /no/ venture capital

it can't be taken seriously until it hits that tipping point
and then there is no turning back -- everyone will be stuck
with it

next -- everyone pays -- that currencies that are not based
on something of value are instead based on belief for their
value.  Gold and silver was a terrible thing to base value
on because in the end it's just a shiny soft metal which has
not intrinsic worth except for it's rarity.  The ancient
greeks used olive oil at least as a time as a kind of
currency -- which at least is a commodity.  We need
something that is not reversible, and consumed completely.
You might be able to resell used oil, and oil comes in any
numbers of different kinds of quality...  not good.

But energy is something that could work -- you perform work
to produce it (which indirectly is all nuclear -- or at
least capture and store it - batteries, oil, gas, sugars
etc.).  If you do useful work measured in the amount of
energy used or generated -- that generates tokens.  If you
consume energy or things or services that are created with
energy, you destroy tokens.  There is no exchange, but it
functions as if there is.

This is how the fnord-chain will work -- a fnord is a
verified fact that is recorded in the fnord-chain.  A fnord
is a fact within the context that it is true -- if the
context changes, then it may or may not be still true, but
it was true in that previous context.  That's why we call it
a fnord -- because a fnord is a conceptual probability cloud
of all possible contexts where something could be true in
any number (but not finite) of different ways.  In a fnord
nothing and everything is both true and false.  But if you
observe it, it will appear as either true or false according
to the context that it was observed in.  In this way a fnord
encompasses all /possible/ universes -- the possible part is
important, which makes it a subset of all universes, because
it requires a causal chain.  Causality is the only real
thing that limits a fnord.  And tracing causal chains in a
fnord-cloud is what the fnord-chain does in a way that
doesn't require trusted third-parties as authorities.  The
fnord-chain is a rhizomatic mesh of casual chains that
estabish a sub-set of possible facts and lies.

------

the truth -- evidence-based truth is at the heart of
criminal justice systems, science, and attempts at goverance
that is not flat out trying to fuck you over.

facts are the one thing we can agree on, because they are
based on something that everyone can point to and see and
hear and touch and scream at it and won't go away, doesn't
fade or loose it's shine or that new car smell.  Facts are
all we have. Facts are the only thing we have that allows us
to get along without murdering each other, to death or
worse.  There is no truth that is not based on facts, there
is no truth in what you feel, or believe or hope or dream,
imagine or halucinate.  If you step into an empty elevator
shaft on the 36th floor or a building (and many other floors
of higher and lower elevations) in a gravity well, you will
fall to your death at the bottom of the shaft.


----

Bitcoin's blockchain made it possible for trustless
transactions.  The block chain has had impeccable timing --
the institutions that make civilization and functioning
societies possible work can only work when the rate of
change and flow of information is within thresholds which we
don't yet know -- but it would seem that we are rapidly
approaching them.

This is crazy complicated -- and is closely tied to the
maximum amounts of change and information that humans can
process in any given period of time and still be able to
function.

We have relied on local, regional and global financial
institutions to provide an infrastructure for trusted
transactions.  But the speed that transactions can take
place (measured now in millionths of a a second) has
outpaced the ability for the governance layer to be able to
police and act as a check on commerce.  All the power is
shifting to the few that have access to computational power
and network speeds that are literally beyond human
comprehension.

This is only the beginning -- because, as we are all aware,
money is nothing more than information.  So whatever happens
with money and transactions will quickly spill over and
encompass any and every kind of information.

We, as individuals are grasping at smoke, that constantly
shifts, defying solidity.  The basic information that we
need to survive as individuals and as a civilization is
increasingly in the hands of a tiny percentage of people.
We're all living in a Philip K. Dick novel where we don't
know what is real, or even who or what we are.  It's telling
that the idea that the universe is a simulation, like in the
Matrix film Trilogy films, is actually so close to being
plausible, that an increasing number of the brightest
scientists on the planet feel the need to weigh in on the
question, when the existence of God barely elicits a shrug
anymore.... Even PKD didn't see that one coming.

We need facts and truth to scale to global industrial scales
-- so that no matter how many facts are asserted; not
millions, or billions but trillions just for starters, that
we have a trustless framework for determining what
assertions are facts which we know within a range of
certainty are true or not.

   Ebola is scary as hell, but it will never wipe us all out
   because it incubates too fast.  Trump is the Ebola of
   truth -- there are groups around the world, over the past
   thirty years who have quietly and systematically
   undermined the collective grasp of what is true. There
   have always been people and groups who have tried to do
   this, but technology as made it possible to refine and
   roll out these techniques on a scale that few comprehend,
   even to those who are doing it.  Trump is so inept and
   patently dimwitted that his attempts to use these same
   techniques are seen for what they are.  It is hoped that
   this is the crack in the seawall that will eventually
   bring it all down and level the playing field for
   everyone.

That sounds like a tall order, but it's not -- that's what
our brains are doing constantly, looking for patterns and
determining if they match or not and their level of
certainty.  We just need to externalize, network and scale
it so that the Web is no longer a semi-structured pile of
steaming information, but a pillar of interconnected facts
that weave all of that information into something that we
can trust and rely on even though we don't trust anyone....

----

EVERYTHING depends on facts that people trust and believe in.

The assertion spew:

  - The Internet of Things -- actually this is a big deal we
    need to know if our devices are telling the truth, or if
    they have been compromised and are now part of a bot
    network.
  - Social Networks
  - Transactions
  - Business, Government etc
  - Contracts, Laws

We need a revenue model for fnord.ltd and it will have to be the shop
model --  a distributed, federated system.

We can structure this as a fact-guild -- 

In each case you take something, a news story, a contract, a map etc
and index all assertions in each --

If there is a fact associated with assertion then it is checked, If
there isn't, then it is flagged as a fnord and it is cloud-sourced.

Each fnord will be a combination of assertions and duck tests.

The process is basically due dilligence -- and people who create
documents, contracts etc are responsible for doing a lot of this work,
but over time the fact-base will make it easier and easier.

So that you'll be able to feed docs into the system and the service
will try to match fnords to facts.  and each instance of the same fact
will strengthen the fact and increase certainty.

** Wolfram Alpha (as a fnord engine)

Google search delivers fnords -- it's often difficult to
know if what you are seeing is true, false, possible or even
probable.  Google has never said that they were anything but
finders of popular fnords.  The facts, falsehoods and
scenarios that reside in those fnords are not neccessarily
popular, so the fnord you are looking for may well be
buried 10 or more screens down at the plank scale of
findability..

Google and other search engines now deliver a narrow number
of facts, but other than calculations and conversions they
don't really deliver much in the way of facts.  It's just
not what they were set up to do.

However, Wolfram Alpha:

 - [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolfram_Alpha][Wolfram Alpha]] | Wikipedia
 - [[http://www.wolframalpha.com/][Wolfram|Alpha: Computational Knowledge Engine]] 
 
has been set up to be an /answer engine/.  WA is a remrkable
achievement, despite the proprietary approach that has been
taken and the limitations places on the public service.

The problem is that answers are based on over a hundred
databases of /facts/ from a variety of sources.  These facts
must be accepted on face value -- they are not documented or
verifiable and except for things such as numerical
computation, can not be used as authoritative sources of
facts.

** IOT

Would it be better if all devices were required to be
their own keepers?

If a device is doing useful work -- it generates tokens, if
it uses resources it spends them.  It only becomes tricky if
those tokens can then be transfered to someone else -- so
that the device is being used to make money.  That's where
things fall apart.  That's where things get hacked and
exploited.  Profit as a moral liability, a vulnerability, a
tempation....  or is that all just Protestant baggage

any time the system is designed to be a game, where there
are winners and losers, it is just a matter of time before
it is gamed -- as in the movie War Games, the only way to
win is not to play at all.

that was a throw-away in the movie Arrival as well -- that
the Chinese approach to communicating with the Aliens was
around games....  and the bias that results from the
perception of the resulting relationship that comes from two
parties playing a game with each other.  It assumes that
each side's motivation is to gain an advantage over the
other -- a dangerous, anthropic assumption that we tend to
project on everything around us -- even nature itself.

fuck -- /we are/ just stupid hairless primates

So how does this relate back to IOT?  Not sure -- I suppose
it depends on where we put IOT devices relative to
ourselves.  If we see them as fleets of devices that are
owned by individuals or groups for making a profit on their
behalf -- think printers and ink cartridges -- then yes, it
will make things a fuck of a lot worse -- I'm thinking of
Cory Doctorrow's dishwashing machines that only will wash
plates that came with the machine.  But IOT could be more
like butterflies in a field.  Doing useful pollination that
will help produce crops that we eat, and ecosystems that we
depend on for our survival -- indirect infrastructure that
is part of the commons.

There should be an incentive to create such infrastructure,
but as soon as it's released into the wild it should be
beyond our control -- a bit like children :)

If these devices are also able to take care of themselves
through their whole life cycle, this could work -- once
released they maintain themselves, paying for repairs from
their own profits, and then saving up for their own
upgrades, decomissioning, recycling and replacement --
perhaps even caching their data and state so that it is
transfered to the replacement unit.  Which would be a sort of
weird kind of immortality that would scare the crap out of
many people.  But then why not?  It would be a sort of
directed evolution -- devices don't reproduce, but
commission others to do it for them....


* Footnotes

[fn:2] See: [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_is_dead][Paul is dead]] | Wikipedia.  There is also the
opposite case where people throughout history have claimed
to be Kings and Popes who had previously died.  Coming back
from the dead was actually a fairly common claim, which puts
Biblical claims into an interesting context when people of
later ages were told of the resurrection of Jesus as being a
singular event, when in fact at least through medieval
times, such a claim barely raised an eyebrow...  Today, such
claims still are made in the guise of popular fiction and
culture which are dim echos of common beliefs held to be
true in past ages.

[fn:3]  Which would become difficult if everyone used
bitcoins.  It /would/ make for a very interesting
blockchain.

[fn:1] In the late 20th Century, [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apple_Inc.][Apple Inc.]] shifted from a
company producing general purpose computers to a consumer
lifestyle electronics manufacturer.  Some products are still
protected by a [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glamour_(presentation)#History][glamour]] (in the original sense of the word)
and protective /wards/ (copyright) that gives them the
appearance of being computers.

